Freedom From Fiat: International Custom and the Case for Individual, Free-Market Selection of Alternate Forms of Money
J. Mason Bump 
 
INTRODUCTION
I.  THE EVOLUTION OF MONEY IN SOCIETY
	A.  Money Selection Through Competition
	B.  The Spontaneous Process of Money Selection
	C.  Money as a Social Institution
	D.  Money Selection as a Historical Question
II.MODERN MONEY, NATIONALLY AND INTERNATIONALLY
	A.  A Brief History of the Money of Western States
	B.  Understanding Fractional Reserve Banking and Fiat Currency
	C.  The Two Economies of the Fractional Reserve System
III.MARKET-BASED SOLUTIONS TO THE MONEY QUESTION
	A.  An Introduction to Cryptocurrency
	B.  Developing and Diversifying the Cryptocurrency Market
	C.  Current and Anticipated Regulation of the Cryptocurrency Market
IV. CODIFIED AND CUSTOMARY ECONOMIC RIGHTS
	A.  Economic Rights: The Eastern Tradition
	B.  The International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights 
C.  Economic Rights: The Western Tradition
	D.  Western Economic Rights as a Matter of Customary Law
CONCLUSION

INTRODUCTION
A common misconception on the part of international human rights advocates is that the so-called economic and social rights originated from communist or socialist theories and traditions to the exclusion of the Western concept of human rights, which is commonly perceived as only encompassing political and civil rights.   In fact, there is a rich tradition of Western thought that not only serves as a counterweight to these communist or socialist notions, but tends to support modern sustainability doctrine.  This paper will examine these origins and perspectives through the lens of currency itself.   
	The first section of this paper concerns the development of money as a societal institution separate and distinct from nations or states, identifying the role currency plays in society and how best it can fulfill that role.  The second section discusses the prevailing notion of the three generations of human rights and why it would be erroneous to consider them mutually exclusive.  
The third section will consider the evolution of this institution as an integral part of national and international bodies, from the establishment of the first central banks to the adoption of modern, international government currencies, such as the euro.  
The fourth section will examine new developments in the market of currencies, such as cryptocurrencies and other market-based alternatives.  As used in this paper, the term “cryptocurrency” refers to a digital or virtual currency that uses cryptography for security.   For our purposes, cryptocurrency will also be defined as a digital currency that is not issued by any central authority, such as a central bank.  
Finally, in conclusion, it will be proven that the availability of market-based alternatives offers more sustainability than the government-based monopoly of fiat currency, as these currencies offer an alternative to the arbitrary depreciation of wealth through inflation.  The term fiat is Latin for the phrase “it shall be.”   Money in the fiat sense is money that derives the whole of its value from public faith in the ability of the money to hold value.   In short, fiat money, like the U.S. dollar, is derived from the supply and demand of the money itself; it has value only because we accept that it has value.  If people lose faith in this type of currency, the value of it may become less than the paper it’s printed on.   This understanding should give international impetus against restrictions on access to and use of market-based currency alternatives, such as cryptocurrencies, by national governments and international bodies alike.  

I.  THE EVOLUTION OF MONEY IN SOCIETY
	In order to understand how money has developed, it is important to understand how it works in relation to society as a whole.  There are certain principles about money itself that, if accepted, allow for an understanding of how this process has developed over time and throughout history for the greater benefit of mankind.  The process by which money forms are selected is one that has led to greater societal development, more efficient use of resources, and the proliferation of trade on a grand scale.  It will be shown that the benefits of this social institution far outweigh the inherent inequality it creates for those who take part in the system due to the increased class mobility and sustainable living it offers when embraced under free market principles.  
A.  Money Selection Through Competition
	Money has not always existed as currency, but has evolved through a competitive process that contains three characteristics—or axioms —which help us understand how this process takes place, if accepted:  1) money is the result of a spontaneous process; 2) money is a social institution; and 3) which commodity serves as money in any period of time is a historical question.   This spontaneous process by which money is selected is independent of government action, but the prevalence and widespread adoption by governments of what is commonly referred to as the social contract system is an attempt to centralize this process.   This furthers the proposition that money exists as a social institution in the free market, and will continue to exist irrespective of government involvement in its development.   
If we separate our understanding of money from its modern adoption by governments themselves, we find that money has taken on many different forms throughout history as a “result of [the] specific and changing economic situations” of various independent centers of civilization.   Since the adoption of money is naturally a free market concept, it begins to make sense that the selection of currency should be removed from central planning and allowed to develop through individual transactions.  Through the free market system, people will naturally adopt the most agreeable medium of exchange, leading to more stable investments and increased sustainability in the economy.   
B.  The Spontaneous Process of Money Selection
Underlying the need for money is the need for a mutually beneficial exchange of value.  Carl Menger noted that value is not anything objectively intrinsic to the good, but rather “[t]o have value, a good must assure the satisfaction of needs that would not be provided for if we did not have it at our command.”   The adoption of certain goods as widely accepted mediums of exchange is a result of the distinction between two types of goods: those existing where there is only an “occasional and limited” demand, and those where the demand is more “general and constant.”   Ludwig von Mises illustrates this point further by breaking down exchanges of these two types of goods that lead to an adoption of an accepted medium of exchange:  
Consequently, those who bring goods of the first kind to market in order to exchange them for goods that they need themselves have as a rule a smaller prospect of success than those who offer goods of the second kind. If, however, they exchange their relatively unmarketable goods for such as are more marketable, they will get a step nearer to their goal and may hope to reach it more surely and economically than if they had restricted themselves to direct exchange. It was in this way that those goods that were originally the most marketable became common media of exchange; that is, goods into which all sellers of other goods first converted their wares and which it paid every would-be buyer of any other commodity to acquire first. . . .  

The progression of increased trade in goods of higher marketability only strengthened the position of certain goods as media of exchange, leading to the solidification of their place in trade not for their utilitarian qualities, but for the value they offered in their capacity to streamline trade and exchange to the benefit of buyers and sellers.  Although it is foreseeable that any type of goods, from barley to bottle caps,  could be used as money in free market selection, the solutions that have caught on are stable in value due to low relative change in the market supply.   
Illustrating this point further, one will note that although a bushel of wheat is a consistent quantity, the intrinsic value of a bushel of wheat depends on how much wheat is produced and how much can be sold before it is no longer useable, among other factors.  Gold, on the other hand, is a commodity with a relatively high level of stability since it is a good store of value (due to high scarcity and low transportation costs), it is homogenous, it is recognizable, and it is indestructible (although it is divisible).   Although gold is considered to be one of the more stable media of exchange, its value has been subject to change throughout history, and is relative to factors in the marketplace and the transacting parties.  Thus, in direct contrast with one of the core tenets of neoclassical economics, gold, or any other form of money, is not neutral in character, and is subject to the economic laws of the market.   
C.  Money as a Social Institution
An understanding of the evolution of money as a social institution will shed light on how it is used and accepted today.  Commodities of high relative value, such as cattle or livestock, were used as media of exchange before substantial uniformity could be widely implemented.   These commodities offered traders some form of relative assurance that the value they would be receiving would be at least somewhat consistent with what they were trading away.   The downside of using these commodities as a form of money would be that the ability to trade in these commodities would be limited to those with substantial wealth or control of wealth-producing resources, whereas the rest of the community would be left to utilize the basic barter system, which has far less consistency in trade values.   
This rudimentary barter system is trade at its most basic state, which requires a “double-coincidence of wants,”   or a situation where two parties want what the other has in their possession.  The limitations on this system were made apparent in early history as traders found themselves unable to craft or trade in goods that were higher in perceived value than the goods brought to market by their counterparts.  There are three problems that make this system very cost-prohibitive:  the difficulty of finding exchange partners, the possibility of bad timing, and inconsistent quantities between the two parties.   For example, without money, a simple taxi ride may be impossible, for the cab driver desires payment as soon as possible, while the passenger would only be able to offer what he or she currently has in their possession (which may not be enough to make the transaction cost-effective), or a promise of a future payment (which may come too late for the cab driver to utilize the promised good in a manner that suits him or her).  Surely, a common media of exchange would easily solve this dilemma, but how does the value of this media become something that can be relied upon by the greater public?  
A common theme in the development of money throughout history is the backing of certain forms of currency by powerful people or institutions.  One of the forms of value added to media of exchange is public perception of the stability of the state backing the media, with the metal itself only satisfying part of the value equation in the case of precious metal coinage when perception of the stability of the regime was low.   Another reason for the proliferation of media in the form of state coinage was the perceived stability of the unit of value itself through standard measures of weight and fineness.   
The stability in value that arose in certain media as a result of these mechanisms is still the ultimate goal of modern monetary policy, though the means with which they attempt to achieve that depend in large part on the faith and credit of the government that backs the currency in question.  The second edge of the stability inherent with government currency is the monopolization of the money supply, which in turn changes the market dynamic of money selection into a question of state sovereignty, with each government unwilling to cede their currency monopoly in exchange for what might be a better media of exchange out of fear of global monetary hegemony.  The market for money alternatives is in an effective deadlock, with monetary hegemony ultimately going to the social system with the most productive economy and highest level of creditworthiness.  
D.  Money Selection as a Historical Question
In order to understand society’s need for currency, it is important to understand the historical situations that have allowed various media to proliferate.  Often, whatever medium of exchange has at least several of the characteristics of sound money at a given point in history serves as the most common medium of exchange for that point in time.   Throughout history, the media of exchange have fluctuated based on the availability of these characteristics and what was commonly available at the time based on the trade systems in use, from the use of wheat in Egyptian times (when barter was most common) to metal ingots prior to their uniform minting by an authority that could be relied upon for consistent weights and measures.   As governments grew in scope and power, control of the money supply was seen as an effective way to draw benefit out of the increased trade resulting from the proliferation of sound money.  
The question of power is essential to this analysis, as the solutions that have been most widely accepted by society at large were backed by some sort of authority (usually governmental), though the acceptance of electronic media created by private parties has been gaining traction with the rise in value of cryptocurrencies.  For nearly all of civilized human history, the stability of money could not be assured without some form of government intervention, and even these measures could lead to disastrous results if policy was not carefully implemented by those in power.   
The question of who gives more power to the other, government or money, has been a chicken-and-egg question in relation to money, for state money gives the government control over transactions and the power to levy taxes with increased oversight with the advent of the digital age, with only eight percent of the world’s currency existing as physical cash.   With this realization, the move toward cryptocurrency is now seen as more feasible compared to when the concept was first promulgated in the late-1980s.  A solution that makes use of modern technology, requires no government oversight, and has protectionary measures built into the currency itself is consistent with the changing needs of global citizens and marks the re-emergence of a free market for various media of exchange free of government influence.  

II.  MODERN MONEY, NATIONALLY AND INTERNATIONALLY
	History has seen many different forms of solutions to the money question, but the central, government-based fiat system that is commonplace now was only sporadically implemented until fairly recently.  The use of stable, rare commodities to serve as money or back government currencies was common practice from the days of the ancient Greeks until the turn of the 20th century, when these forms were supplemented and even replaced with paper fiat currency in order to accommodate increased government debt and spending.  Although this system is seen as stable, history has many examples of this system going wrong when central planners fail to observe basic truths about macroeconomics and the money supply.  This modern  advent of arbitrary inflation that can be proven to result in different economic benefits at various distances from the money supply, which disparately harms those furthest away from the sources of money.  
A.  A Brief History of the Money of Western States
Government currency was at one time a novel concept, and we can owe its origins to the same crucible of democratic-style government found in the culture of the ancient Greeks, with the monetary system they employed being successively employed by the Romans and the Byzantines.  The use of “specie,” or coined money, first occurred toward the end of the eighth century B.C., and was not a wholly Greek invention, but was improved upon through their process of casting pieces of metal into uniform weight and imprinted with a symbol of state authority.   Various arguments have been raised about whether the value of the specie arose out of the metal itself or the stamp of authority, but regardless of this, a political revolution ensued in the sixth century B.C., with the structure of Greek civilization changing from nomadic and subsistence-based to a market system, where people crafted various handicrafts to exchange them for coins, casting aside the old barter system with apparent indifference as value became more certain and trade became more convenient.   
While the Greek system of coinage took some time to be adopted by the Romans, public debt was used by the Romans well before coinage was implemented, and the new levels of liquidity presented by coinage as well as the flood of specie that arrived with each new military conquest led to massive increases in public and private debt from depreciation, and was a big contributing factor to the ultimate fracture of the Roman Empire.   Additionally, the lack of a uniform policy for coinage and banking created additional uncertainty in smaller monetary denominations.   Gold coinage was under the jurisdiction of the Emperor (debased  with each new minting),  silver was controlled by the Senate, and copper was controlled by various lesser cities.   Adding more uncertainty, frontier generals were often allowed to mint their own money, and inconsistent and exorbitant interest rates were imposed by banks who minted and loaned out the money itself.   The inability to institute a uniform standard was the major factor behind the demise of Roman money, contributing to the fracture of the Roman Empire and the emergence of the Byzantine Empire.  
Although the Byzantines inherited the broken monetary system of the Romans, upon the division of the empire between east and west they were able to improve upon it through changes in both the character and administration of money.   The Greek tradition of sound money was incorporated into Byzantine monetary policy through the creation of a standard measure for the copper follis under Diocletian and later the gold solidus and silver miliarense under Constantine, none of which would be allowed to be debased or tampered with by successive emperors, as had been consistently done by each of the old Roman emperors.   Trade flourished as merchants realized the soundness of the value of Byzantine currency and continued until the credit of the Greeks was effectively ruined by the measures of Alexius, which exchanged a great amount of capital to the republics of Italy in return for the evacuation of Byzantium.   The fatal blow to Byzantium didn’t occur until the time of the Fourth Crusade, a result of military action rather than economic collapse. 
The fracture and ultimate collapse of the Roman Empire in its original and bifurcated forms led to the loss of most of the institutions of money outside of Byzantium until the advent of the Renaissance period, when various credit instruments were invented and previous notions of debt and interest proliferated under loosening laws.   Still, these systems were largely based upon the concept of commodity-backed money and specie for payment in satisfaction of debt since markets were not yet developed enough to implement a paper-based monetary system on a large scale (though it had occurred on a smaller scale in Europe starting in the twelfth century).   
Although his career was short-lived, the Scotsman John Law is considered to be the father of the concept of modern paper fiat currency issued from a central bank in the western world.   No longer would commodities or specie back this “bank money,” but rather indirect evidence of commercial wealth within the realm served by the central bank.   Thus, the value of a unit of currency was imputed based purely upon the faith and credit of the government supporting it, rather than the combination of official marking and standard measure.  
Although the system of John Law had run its course, paper fiat currency was still a rather novel idea at the time of the American Revolution, with the major powers such as Spain and Great Britain often giving their citizens specie such as silver dollars, gold guineas, and silver pounds and shillings, and Great Britain even outlawing paper money entirely in the 1760s.   In America, the colonial governments and Continental Congress issued paper currency in an attempt to support the colonial economy as specie became scarce and trade dwindled as a result of the British blockade.  However, without even a stable central monetary policy to support the notes, depreciation occurred rapidly, with many colonial combatants adopting the phrase “not worth a Continental” in their wartime parlance.   
These issues led to the crafting of Federalist theories of central banking by Alexander Hamilton, the first U.S. treasury secretary, who was able to consolidate public debt and finance, establish a new United States dollar, and set forth a central bank, banking system, and several securities markets to better support the economy of the constitutional government form of 1789.   The establishment of these centralized institutions resulted in a stable dollar supported by specie, which in turn supported the credit of the new government by allowing for satisfactory payment of national debt.  Although the federal United States would not use fiat paper currency again until the Civil War,  the theories of centralized banking arguably paved the way for more widespread adoption and incorporation of paper notes backed by the central banks of other governments.  
Although fiat currency was now a possible alternative to the common practice of commodity-backed currency and specie, the gold standard and bimetallic policy dominated the practices of modern central banks for much of the nineteenth century, with mixed results.  The Bank of England’s bank note policy was sporadic with respect to their support by actual precious metal held by banks until the act of 1844, which was an attempt to cause “the mixed circulation of coin and bank notes to expand and contract, as it would have expanded and contracted under similar circumstances had it consisted exclusively of coin."   
In America, central banks were either lauded by capitalists due to the private control of the money supply or vilified by democrats for their lack of accountability and equality, culminating in the populist, democratic Jacksonian victory in 1836, which led to the harsh expiration of the charter of the Bank of the United States.   Slowly following Britain and the rest of the world’s lead, the United States effectively went on the gold standard after the infusion of gold in domestic trade from the California gold rush,  then officially by matter of national law with the passing of the Gold Standard Act of 1900.   However, the burst of the gold bubble in September 24, 1869, as a result of the “Great Gold Conspiracy” perpetrated by Jay Gould and James Fisk Jr., caused people to question the utility of putting all of the nation’s wealth into one basket.   It was this scheme to drive up the market value of gold by instilling fear in speculators that led to the ruin of thousands and a lesser-known Great Depression, which lasted from 1873 to 1880.   The reality of just a few men influencing the value of the commodity backing the national currency led to uncertainty about the future of the gold standard and whether the nation’s gold-backed wealth could be sustainable.  
These fears became very real during the panic of 1907, when the New York Stock Exchange nearly failed to meet the money demands of its traders, and would have had it not been for the intervention of J.P. Morgan himself.   It was this panic that set minds in motion to move away from the gold standard and establish what was seen as a more stable alternative that utilized both democratic and capitalistic principles in its answer to the money question.  The passing of the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 allowed the newly formed bank to issue elastic money, or fiat money, to supplement the gold supply, and ultimately replaced it with the suspension of the redemption of dollars for gold in 1933.   The fractional reserve banking system employed by the Federal Reserve System is now nearly ubiquitous for central banks the world over.  
B.  Understanding Fractional Reserve Banking and Fiat Currency
	The passing of the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 marked the end of the “gilded age” and with it much of the disagreement in the United States about whether democratic or capitalistic principles should guide the policy of the nation’s money supply.  The system these two factions agreed on was a hybrid that implemented twelve Federal Reserve banks, which are privately capitalized, but are overseen by a board appointed by the White House; important powers ceded to this system at their creation were the ability to buy and sell government securities as well as tax the Reserve banks to pay operating expenses (freeing them from the Congressional “power of the purse”).   The implementation of this system led to the establishment of fractional reserve bank systems in nearly all of the central banks of the world.  
These powers are coupled with the fractional reserve banking system employed by the Federal Reserve, which is a hybrid of loan banking and deposit banking.  These two systems in their pure form are benign and welfare enhancing, but lead to rampant money creation (note: not the same as wealth creation) when combined.   In a pure reserve banking system, the amount of money in circulation doesn’t change when deposited with a bank; banks hold the entirety of their deposits in reserve, and none of them are used to make loans.   In a fractional reserve banking system, the banks take deposits and physically keep a fraction of them while loaning out the rest to make loans.   
By way of illustrating this process, a situation may arise where a bank customer deposits $100 with his bank, raising the total of the amount held with the bank by $100 and making an obligation on the “Liabilities” portion of the bank’s ledger.  At the same time, the bank is free to use a portion of the deposit amount as loan principal up to the amount required by law or policy to be held as reserves not to be loaned out (usually ten percent).  When a loan is made using the full amount allowed, the $100 originally noted as Cash would be changed to a notation of $90 in Loans and $10 in Reserves in the “Assets” portion of the ledger.  Since the amount of money the account holder has in his account hasn’t changed as a result of the loan, this leads to an increase of $90 in the money supply through nothing but generally accepted accounting fiction.  This “money multiplier” can continue as long as the same money is redeposited into banks and loaned out, resulting in an inherently inflationary system that disproportionately affects those furthest away from the initial sources of the money supply. 
C.  The Two Economies of the Fractional Reserve System
	The fractional reserve banking system is one that is inherently inflationary due to its exclusive use of fiat money.  
	In the present system, the money is distributed first from the Federal Reserve branches, where it is loaned out to private banks who must pay interest on that money.  This new money carries a higher value than the old money since the amount of money in circulation has gone up by a factor of however much has been distributed.  As a result, the money presently in circulation becomes less valuable.  The problem does not stop at the beginning of the distribution channels, for the money multiplier ends up creating a larger money supply and further increases inflation as it moves from banks to institutions in the form of loans, and then from institutions down to retailers and workers, in a simplified example.  
	As the new money moves down the system, this progressive inflation bids prices up at the expense of those people who do not yet have access to the new money.   This process effectively creates two economies: one in which “[t]he first receivers of the new money gain most,” and the other in which the late receivers of the money are effectively “taxed” of the benefit of their original purchasing power.   This system, therefore, uses inflation in a discriminatory manner against those with the most distant access to the system, who are usually those who rely on fixed income.   One of the intended benefits of this system is that it was meant to remove the threat of depressions or serious recessions, but events such as our own Great Depression and the Recession of 2008 have proven that not only is this illusory, but that the system’s faults disproportionately affect those who have the least protection from such cataclysmic events.  

IV.  MARKET-BASED SOLUTIONS TO THE MONEY QUESTION
	Constantly derided and almost always misunderstood, cryptocurrency emerged seemingly out of nowhere, bringing with it a new marketplace for money alternatives that would have been considered the work of science-fiction several decades ago.  The name, or pseudonym, associated with the creation of Bitcoin, the most famous cryptocurrency, is Satoshi Nakamoto, who has only ever communicated via electronic message before cutting off all communication in 2011.   To this day no conclusive evidence has been brought forward about his true identity (though an Australian entrepreneur claimed to be Nakamoto in 2015, being met with mixed skepticism).   Regardless of the true identity of the father of modern blockchain cryptocurrency technology, the implications of these new systems are far-reaching, and push us to question our reliance on government for the stability and security of modern money.  
A.  An Introduction to Cryptocurrency
	As was mentioned earlier, faith in any form of money is dependent upon the ability of that unit to remain stable.  Fiat currencies arising from institutions like central banks achieve stability from controlling the money supply and imposing anticounterfeiting measures, which are almost always supported by law enforcement.   Cryptocurrencies, on the other hand, do not have access to government-enforced anticounterfeiting measures, nor do they have a central planning authority to control the money supply, so the institutions that create them have to incorporate these measures into the money itself.  
The measures used by cryptocurrencies to meet their security needs heavily involve cryptography, which uses cryptographic constructions such as cryptographic hashes, digital signatures, and zero-knowledge proofs to prevent tampering and equivocation as well as encode the mathematical protocols for the design of the system itself.    All confirmed transactions from the start of a cryptocurrency’s creation are stored in a public ledger.  The identities of the coin owners are encrypted, and the system uses other cryptographic techniques to ensure the legitimacy of record keeping. The ledger ensures that corresponding “digital wallets” can calculate an accurate spendable balance. Also, new transactions can be checked to ensure that each transaction uses only coins currently owned by the spender. Bitcoin calls this public ledger a “transaction block chain“.  
Furthermore, the supply of cryptocurrencies is controlled with adaptive scaling, a protocol that restricts or expands the amount of transaction blocks that can be mined at any given time, which makes additional units more difficult and expensive to mine.   Adaptive scaling is a function of the currency’s programming itself.  For example, Bitcoin is programmed to allow for one transaction block to be mined every ten minutes. The algorithm adjusts after every 2016 blocks (theoretically, that’s every two weeks) to get easier or harder based on how long it actually took for those 2016 blocks to be mined. So if it only took 13 days for the network to mine 2016 blocks, that means it’s too easy to mine, so the difficulty increases. However, if it takes 15 days for the network to mine 2016 blocks, that shows that it’s too hard to mine, so the difficulty decreases.
Mining itself is undertaken by a user, who must solve increasingly complex computational problems with the aid of powerful computers to add new transactions to the transaction block chain.   When these transactions are added, a unit of the cryptocurrency is stored in the miner’s digital wallet.   The solving of these mathematical computations is what gives each crypto unit its perceived value, which is known as the “proof-of-work” system.   The mined cryptocurrency units are stored in digital wallets along the block chain and are transferred via the block chain to other digital wallets—no physical object ever exists.  In this manner, cryptocurrencies have been able to achieve levels of stability and security that rival fiat currencies supported by some of the most powerful governments in the world.  
B.  Developing and Diversifying the Cryptocurrency Market
Although cryptocurrency didn’t receive much media attention until the development of Bitcoin, the first company to attempt an electronic currency system was actually “DigiCash” in 1989.   This system failed, but it planted the seed for a private revolution in the way currency could be promulgated in the digital age.  Other iterations, such as Liberty Reserve and e-Gold, failed as a result of legal trouble for money laundering in 2006.   The first and most famous example of the proliferation of cryptocurrency and blockchain technology was the creation of Bitcoin by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009.  As the price swelled while supply became more scarce as it became harder and more expensive to mine Bitcoin, other alternatives made their way to the market, such as Ethereum, Ripple, and Litecoin.  
In Bitcoin’s wake, the creators of these cryptocurrencies have decided to make their identities known and back their creations publicly.  For example, the currency of Ethereum was developed by members of the Ethereum foundation in 2013, which is based in Switzerland.   Litecoin was created by a Google engineer named Charles Lee, who was inspired by Bitcoin, leading to the coin’s unofficial nickname as the “little brother” of Bitcoin.   The presence of alternatives to Bitcoin creates a diverse range of options for investors in cryptocurrency, making an investment in cryptocurrency less risky by way of portfolio diversification principles.  
C.  Current Regulation of the Cryptocurrency Market
	The regulation of cryptocurrency so far has only taken form in the domestic laws of certain countries.  While the United States has only recently taken regulatory action in the world of cryptocurrency through the SEC’s declaration that ICO (Initial Coin Offering) tokens are subject to federal security laws, investors have also remained wary of the Internal Revenue Service by paying capital gains taxes on cryptocurrency sold for a profit.  Russia and China, as well as numerous other countries, have issued declarations of intent to heavily regulate cryptocurrencies, the mining of them, and ICOs (Initial Coin Offerings).  Still, others have embraced the concept of cryptocurrency, with Japan hosting eleven regulated Bitcoin exchanges that control over sixty percent of the global Bitcoin market.   International bodies have not yet advanced any tangible plan to regulate cryptocurrency, although the IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde has stated that expects the IMF to play a role in regulating the industry at some time in the future. 

III.  CODIFIED AND CUSTOMARY ECONOMIC RIGHTS
While the codified international law indicates that so-called economic and social rights are socialist or communist in nature (owing Eastern economic tradition to the development of the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), corresponding rights from western tradition are largely either customary or codified in domestic legislation, decreasing their presence on the official international spectrum.  For example, the provisions promoting state action in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights impute progressive realization of mandated educational programs, social security services, clothing, housing, and healthcare, with little or no concern for the value to be exchanged for their realization.  
A.  Economic Rights: The Eastern Tradition
For the purposes of this paper, the term “Eastern Tradition” of economic rights refers to economic schools of thought ultimately inspired by Karl Marx, whether socialist or communist in nature (both of these terms are used interchangeably with “collectivist”).  Although the collectivist traditions of certain nations have attempted to limit property rights by granting the government rights in private property or by the abolition of private property through the dubious distinction of “personal property,” market forces have always managed to impact the value of the domestic currency of these countries in both individual exchange and exchange between governments.  This runs in direct conflict with the fundamental proposition of Marx’s teachings—that all value depends solely on the incorporated qualities of labor.    
  A major problem with collectivist theories is the effective distribution of property once removed from the private domain and seized under the public property theory.  This system may work under small commune-style structures and may have even worked prior to the establishment of large state governments, but any time the implementation of such a system is attempted on a scale larger than a small town, a power vacuum opens up and is filled by the authoritative body with the means to control the population.  This central authority was integral to the communist traditions of Soviet Russia and other Eastern Bloc countries, where its intentional  or unintentional ineffectiveness became apparent.  
The ineffectiveness of the revolutionary government and the much more centralized system later implemented in Soviet Russia was evident in its inability to distribute goods and services where they were needed most, even with the retention of currency for transactions at the individual level.    In short, the retention of both the “means of production” and control of the money supply yielded disastrous results as the reality of the situation differed greatly from the expected benefits of the system due to the inability of the central governments to subsidize innovation where it was needed and manage production to properly address the issue of scarcity.  
B.  The International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights
	The International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, or ICESCR, was a corollary to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, or ICCPR, in international codified law, which served as vehicles to get both the Eastern Bloc countries and the West to sit down at the same table, respectively.  The ICESCR was an attempt to codify the rights thought to be most important to the collectivist nations, such as education, healthcare, employment, and a certain standard of living, while the ICCPR was an attempt to codify the Western tradition of individual rights, such as the right to free speech, freedom of religion, and the right to due process, most famously enumerated in The United States Constitution.  
	The ICESCR and the ICCPR have not been signed or ratified by a good number of the members of the United Nations, but the agreement of some countries to their terms has led to them being incorporated into international law by reference.  This means that, although their terms are not binding, they do impact the progressive development of international policy by virtue of cultural relativism arguments and ease of citation in debates by world leaders.  
C.  Economic Rights: The Western Tradition
In Western nations, economic rights have arisen out of commonly accepted principles, such as the enforceability of contracts and the rights of creditors.  In this sphere, equity has played a large role in the development of law, both at the national and international level, throughout history.  English courts developed their principles logically through the common law system, and through much of their rulings the concepts of individual rights were codified in the ICCPR and national documents such as the U.S. Constitution.  While only the civil and political rights developed by this system made it into the ICCPR, that doesn’t mean that the concepts of equity should be treated with any less regard by the International Court of Justice or the Economic and Social Council when rendering a decision or opinion.  
D.  Western Economic Rights as a Matter of Customary Law
In the great Western tradition of economic rights, property has been held as a nearly divine right of the individual, codified by domestic legislation in countries that owe at least some portion of their development to capitalistic principles.  As has been stated before, value is dependent on the needs of each party to a transaction.  In mutual dealings between these countries as well as countries with socialist or even communist backgrounds, the exchange of domestic currency in satisfaction of debts and contracts has shaped the value and marketability of these currencies, owing to an international custom of utilizing market principles in the determination of the value of currencies.  The distinction between government property and “personal property” in a communist or socialist setting is a meaningless one if market forces equally affect the exchange of value in transactions of property in both categories.
Furthermore, the concept of the enforceability of contracts has been upheld in ICJ decisions as between governments, both still in existence and those succeeding former governments, as in the case of Hungary v. Slovakia.   These types of decisions affirm at least a strong deference to the enforceability of contracts in customary international law, and indicate that other concepts of equity and economic rights promulgated by Western systems should not be disregarded simply because they are not explicitly codified.  

CONCLUSION
	The concept of money was one that arose independently of government, but the power it offered to those who could effectively maintain control of it led to its incorporation into government structures well into the present day.  By and large, government control of money was embraced by society due to the increased stability it gave money from implementing uniform standards and measures, as well as the law enforcement and anticounterfeiting measures that could not be replicated or trusted to be run effectively by private parties until the advent of cryptocurrency.  Cryptocurrency serves as a resurgence of the notion that market principles still apply to money selection, and that relying on the government to implement sound monetary policy is no longer necessary or warranted given the arbitrary loss of wealth resulting from inflation or poor judgment.  
Furthermore, the issues arising from centralized systems embraced by both Western and collectivist nations disparately affect the people closest to poverty, and a system that removes both central planning and arbitrary inflation will result in a more sustainable economy and greater class mobility for the citizens of the world.  Whether the systems of blockchain and encryption currently proliferated will mark the beginning of a money revolution remains to be seen, but it would be improper to say that the world has not felt their impact.  
